##front [BBC TV Film Leader]
L1-cue_0
##front Credits: Cornell University U.S.A., The Character of Physical Law, Professor Richard Feynman gives the Messenger Lectures
L1-cue_1
##Title Introduction by Provost Dale R. Corson
L1-cue_2
#Ladies and gentlemen, it’s my privilege to introduce the Messenger Lecturer,
L1-cue_3
Professor Richard P. Feynman of the California Institute of Technology.
L1-cue_4
#Professor Feynman is a distinguished theoretical physicist, and he’s done much to bring order
L1-cue_5
out of the confusion which has marked much of the spectacular development
L1-cue_6
in physics during the post-war period.
L1-cue_7
Among his honors and awards I will mention only the Albert Einstein award, in 1954.
L1-cue_8
This is an award which is made every third year,
L1-cue_9
and which includes a gold medal and a substantial sum of money.
L1-cue_10
#Professor Feynman did his undergraduate work at MIT and his graduate work at Princeton.
L1-cue_11
He worked on the Manhattan Project at Princeton and later at Los Alamos.
L1-cue_12
He was appointed an assistant professor here at Cornell in 1944,
L1-cue_13
although he did not assume residence until the end of the war.
L1-cue_14
#I thought it might be interesting to see what was said about him when he was appointed
L1-cue_15
at Cornell, so I searched the minutes of our board of trustees—
L1-cue_16
and there’s absolutely no record of his appointment.
L1-cue_17
There are, however, some twenty references to leaves of absence, salary, and promotions.
L1-cue_18
One reference interested me especially: on July 31, 1945 the chairman
L1-cue_19
of the physics department wrote the dean of the Arts College,
L1-cue_20
stating that "Dr. Feynman is an outstanding teacher and investigator,
L1-cue_21
the equal of whom develops infrequently."
L1-cue_22
The chairman suggested that an annual salary of $3,000 was a bit too low
L1-cue_23
for a distinguished faculty member,
L1-cue_24
and recommended that Professor Feynman’s salary be increased $900.
L1-cue_25
The dean, in an act of unusual generosity and with complete disregard for the solvency
L1-cue_26
of the university, crossed out the $900 and made it an even $1,000.
L1-cue_27
You can see that we thought highly of Professor Feynman, even then.
L1-cue_28
#Feynman took up residence here at the end of 1945
L1-cue_29
and spent five highly productive years on our faculty.
L1-cue_30
He left Cornell in 1950 and went to Caltech, where he has been ever since.
L1-cue_31
#Before I let him talk, I want to tell you just a little bit more about him.
L1-cue_32
Three or four years ago he started teaching a beginning physics course at Caltech,
L1-cue_33
and the result has added a new dimension to his fame.
L1-cue_34
His lectures are now published in two volumes,
L1-cue_35
and they represent a refreshing approach to the subject.
L1-cue_36
In the preface of the published lectures,
L1-cue_37
there’s a picture of Feynman performing happily on the bongo drums.
L1-cue_38
My Caltech friends tell me that he sometimes drops in on the Los Angeles nightspots and takes
L1-cue_39
over the work of the drummer, but Professor Feynman tells me that that’s not so.
L1-cue_40
#Another of his specialties is safecracking.
L1-cue_41
One legend says that he once opened a locked safe in a secret establishment,
L1-cue_42
removed a secret document, and left a note saying GUESS WHO.
L1-cue_43
I could tell you about the time that he learned Spanish before he went to give a series
L1-cue_44
of lectures in Brazil, but I won’t.
L1-cue_45
#This gives you enough background, I think, so let me say that I’m delighted
L1-cue_46
to welcome Professor Feynman back to Cornell; his general topic is the nature of physical law,
L1-cue_47
and his topic for tonight is The Law of Gravitation— an example of physical law. Professor Feynman.
L1-cue_48
##Title The Law of Gravitation: an example of physical law
L1-cue_49
#It’s odd, but in the infrequent occasions when I’ve been called upon
L1-cue_50
in a formal place to play the bongo drums, the introducer never seems to find it necessary
L1-cue_51
to mention that I also do theoretical physics.
L1-cue_52
I believe that’s probably that we respect the arts more than the sciences.
L1-cue_53
The artists of the Renaissance said that man’s main concern should be for man.
L1-cue_54
And yet there are some other things of interest in the world:
L1-cue_55
even the artist appreciates sunsets, and the ocean waves,
L1-cue_56
and the march of the stars across the heavens.
L1-cue_57
And there is some reason, then, to talk of other things sometimes.
L1-cue_58
#As we look into these things, we get an aesthetic pleasure from them directly
L1-cue_59
on observation, but there’s also a rhythm and a pattern between the phenomena of nature,
L1-cue_60
which isn’t apparent to the eye, but only to the eye of analysis.
L1-cue_61
And it’s these rhythms and patterns which we call physical laws.
L1-cue_62
#What I want to talk about in this series
L1-cue_63
of lectures is the general characteristics of these physical laws.
L1-cue_64
That’s even another level, if you will, of higher generality over the laws themselves.
L1-cue_65
And it’s really (all I am talking about is) nature as seen as a result
L1-cue_66
of detailed analysis—but only the most overall general qualities
L1-cue_67
of nature is what I mainly wish to speak about.
L1-cue_68
#Now, such a topic has a tendency to become too philosophical, because it becomes so general—
L1-cue_69
that a person talks in such generalities that everybody can understand him—
L1-cue_70
and it’s considered to be some deep philosophy, if you will.
L1-cue_71
However, I would like to be rather more special, and I would like to be understood
L1-cue_72
in an honest way rather than in a vague way to some extent; and so, if you don’t mind,
L1-cue_73
I am going to try to give—instead of only generalities in this first lecture—
L1-cue_74
an example of physical law, so that you have at least one example of the things
L1-cue_75
about which I am speaking generally.
L1-cue_76
In this way, I can use this example again and again to give an instance to make a reality
L1-cue_77
out of something which would otherwise be too abstract.
L1-cue_78
#Now, I’ve chosen for my special example of physical law to tell you about the theory
L1-cue_79
of gravitation, or the phenomena of gravity.
L1-cue_80
Why I chose gravity, I don’t know—whatever I chose, you would have asked the same question.
L1-cue_81
Actually, it was one of the first great laws to be discovered,
L1-cue_82
and it has an interesting history.
L1-cue_83
You might say, "Yes, but then it’s old hat—
L1-cue_84
I would like to hear something about more modern science."
L1-cue_85
More recent perhaps, but not more modern: modern science is exactly in the same tradition
L1-cue_86
as the discoveries of the law of gravitation.
L1-cue_87
It is only more recent discoveries that we would be talking about.
L1-cue_88
And so I do not feel at all bad about telling you of the law of gravitation, because I am—
L1-cue_89
in describing its history and the methods, the character of its discovery and its quality—
L1-cue_90
talking about modern science, completely modern.
L1-cue_91
#This law has been called the greatest generalization achieved by the human mind.
L1-cue_92
And you can get already, from my introduction, that I’m interested not so much
L1-cue_93
in the human mind as in the marvel of nature, who can obey such an elegant
L1-cue_94
and simple law as this law of gravitation.
L1-cue_95
So our main concentration will not be on how clever we are to have found it all out,
L1-cue_96
but on how clever she is to pay attention to it!
L1-cue_97
#Now, what is this law of gravitation that we’re going to talk about?
L1-cue_98
The law is that two bodies—or bodies—exert a force upon each other which is inversely
L1-cue_99
as the square of the distance between them, and varies directly as the product of their masses.
L1-cue_100
Mathematically, we can write that great law down in a formula: some kind of a constant,
L1-cue_101
times the product of the two masses, divided by the square of the distance.
L1-cue_102
Now, if I add the remark that a body reacts to a force by accelerating,
L1-cue_103
or by changing its velocity every second to an extent inversely as its mass—
L1-cue_104
it changes velocity more if the mass is lower, and so on, inversely as the mass—
L1-cue_105
then I have said everything about the law of gravitation that needs to be said:
L1-cue_106
everything else is a consequence, a mathematical consequence of those two things that I said.
L1-cue_107
That’s a remarkable enough phenomenon in itself,
L1-cue_108
that the next lecture will consider this in more detail.
L1-cue_109
#Now, I know you’re not all—I know some of you are, but you’re not all—
L1-cue_110
mathematicians, so you cannot all immediately see all
L1-cue_111
of the consequences of these two remarks.
L1-cue_112
And so what I would like to do in this lecture is to briefly tell you the story
L1-cue_113
of the discovery, tell you what some of the consequences are,
L1-cue_114
what the effect this discovery had on the history of science, what kinds of mystery
L1-cue_115
such a law entails, something about the refinements made by Einstein,
L1-cue_116
and possibly the relation to other laws of physics.
L1-cue_117
#The history of the thing, briefly, is this:
L1-cue_118
that the ancients first observed the way the planets seemed to move about in the sky,
L1-cue_119
and concluded that they all—along with the earth—went around the sun.
L1-cue_120
This discovery was later made independently by Copernicus, after they had forgotten—
L1-cue_121
people had forgotten—that it had already been made.
L1-cue_122
#Now, the next question that came up to study was: exactly how do they go around the sun—
L1-cue_123
that is, exactly what kind of motion: do they go with the sun at the center of a circle,
L1-cue_124
or do they go in some other kind of a curve?
L1-cue_125
How fast do they move?—and so on.
L1-cue_126
And this discovery took longer to make.
L1-cue_127
The times after Copernicus were times in which there were great debates—
L1-cue_128
about whether the planets in fact went around the sun along with the earth,
L1-cue_129
or whether the earth was at the center of the universe, and so on;
L1-cue_130
and there were considerable arguments about this—
L1-cue_131
when a man named Tycho Brahe got an idea of a way of answering the question:
L1-cue_132
he thought that it might perhaps be a good idea to look very, very carefully,
L1-cue_133
and to record where the planets actually appear in the sky—
L1-cue_134
and then the alternative theories might be distinguished from one another.
L1-cue_135
#This is the key of modern science, and is the beginning of the true understanding of nature:
L1-cue_136
this idea to look at the thing, to record the details,
L1-cue_137
and to hope that in the information thus obtained may lie a clue to one or another
L1-cue_138
of a possible theoretical interpretation.
L1-cue_139
So Tycho—who was a rich man and owned, I believe, an island near Copenhagen—
L1-cue_140
outfitted his island with great brass circles and special observing positions (situating chairs
L1-cue_141
that you could look through a little hole) and recorded night
L1-cue_142
after night the position of the planets.
L1-cue_143
#It’s only through such hard work that we can find out anything.
L1-cue_144
When all these data were collected they came into the hands of Kepler,
L1-cue_145
who then tried to analyze what kinds of motions the planets made around the sun.
L1-cue_146
He did this by a method of trial and error.
L1-cue_147
At one stage he thought he had it: he figured out that they went around the sun in circles,
L1-cue_148
with the sun off center, and noticed that one planet—
L1-cue_149
I think it was Mars, but I don’t know—was eight minutes of arc off.
L1-cue_150
He decided that this was too big for Tycho Brahe to have made an error,
L1-cue_151
and that this was not the right answer.
L1-cue_152
#So because of the precision of experiments, he was able to proceed and go onto another trial
L1-cue_153
and found, in fact, ultimately this—three things: first, that the planets went in ellipses
L1-cue_154
around the sun, with the sun at a focus.
L1-cue_155
An ellipse is a curve all artists know about, because it’s a foreshortened circle;
L1-cue_156
children know about it because somebody told them that if you take a string and tie it
L1-cue_157
to two tacks and put a pencil in there, it’ll make an ellipse.
L1-cue_158
These two tacks are the foci, and if the sun is here, the shape of the orbit of a planet
L1-cue_159
around the sun is one of these curves.
L1-cue_160
#The next question is, in going around the ellipse, how does it go:
L1-cue_161
does it go faster when it’s near the sun,
L1-cue_162
and slower when it’s further from the sun?—and so on.
L1-cue_163
If we take away the other focus, we have the sun, then, and the planet going around.
L1-cue_164
#Kepler found the answer to this, too.
L1-cue_165
He found this: that if you put the position of the planet down at two times separated
L1-cue_166
by some definite time—let’s say three weeks—and then at another place in the orbit,
L1-cue_167
put the positions of the planets—again separated by three weeks—
L1-cue_168
and draw lines from the sun to the planet (technically called radius vectors,
L1-cue_169
but anyway lines from the sun to the planet)—then the area that’s enclosed in the orbit
L1-cue_170
of the planet and the two lines that are separated
L1-cue_171
by the planet’s position three weeks apart is the same no matter what part
L1-cue_172
of the orbit the thing is on.
L1-cue_173
So that it has to go faster when it’s closer—in order to get the same area as it goes slower
L1-cue_174
when it’s further away—and in this precise manner.
L1-cue_175
Some several years later, he found the third rule: that had not to do exactly with the motion
L1-cue_176
of a single planet around the sun, but related the various planets to each other.
L1-cue_177
It said that the time that it took the planet to go all the way around was related to the size
L1-cue_178
of the orbit—that the time went as the square root of the cube of the size of the orbit—
L1-cue_179
and the size of the orbit is the diameter all the way
L1-cue_180
across the biggest distance on the ellipse.
L1-cue_181
#So he has these three laws, which I’ll summarize by saying: it’s an ellipse;
L1-cue_182
that equal areas are swept in equal times; and that the time to go around varies
L1-cue_183
as the three-half power of the size—the square root of a cube of the size.
L1-cue_184
So that’s three laws of Kepler, which is a very complete description
L1-cue_185
of the motion of the planets around the sun.
L1-cue_186
#The next question was, what makes them go around?
L1-cue_187
Or how can we understand this in more detail?
L1-cue_188
Or is there anything else to say?
L1-cue_189
In the meantime, Galileo was investigating the laws of motion.
L1-cue_190
#Incidentally, at the time of Kepler, the problem of what drove the planets
L1-cue_191
around the sun was answered by some people by saying
L1-cue_192
that there were angels behind here beating their wings
L1-cue_193
and pushing the planet along around the orbit.
L1-cue_194
#As we’ll see, that answer is not very far from the truth: the only difference is
L1-cue_195
that the angels sit in a different direction, and their wings go this way.
L1-cue_196
But the point that the angels sit in a different direction is the one that I must now come to.
L1-cue_197
Galileo—in studying the laws of motion, and doing a number of experiments
L1-cue_198
such as seeing how balls rolled down incline planes, and how pendulums swung, and so on—
L1-cue_199
discovered an idealization, a great principle called the principle of inertia, which is this:
L1-cue_200
that if a thing has nothing acting on it—if an object has nothing acting on it—
L1-cue_201
and it’s going along at a certain velocity in a straight line, it will go at the same velocity
L1-cue_202
at exactly the same straight line forever.
L1-cue_203
Unbelievable though that may sound to anybody who has tried to make a ball roll forever,
L1-cue_204
the idealization is correct: that if there were no influences acting (such as friction
L1-cue_205
on the floor, and so on), the thing would go at a uniform speed forever.
L1-cue_206
#The next point was made by Newton, who discussed the next question, which is:
L1-cue_207
when it doesn’t go in a straight line, then what?
L1-cue_208
He answered this way: that a force is needed to change the velocity in any manner.
L1-cue_209
For instance, if you’re pushing it in a direction that it moves, it will speed up;
L1-cue_210
if you find that it changes direction, then the force must have been sideways.
L1-cue_211
And that the force can be measured by the product of two effects: first,
L1-cue_212
how much does the velocity change in a small interval of time?
L1-cue_213
How fast is the velocity changing?
L1-cue_214
How much is it accelerating in this direction,
L1-cue_215
or how much is the velocity changing when it changes direction?
L1-cue_216
That’s called the acceleration.
L1-cue_217
When that’s multiplied by a coefficient called the mass
L1-cue_218
of an object (or its inertia coefficient), then that together is the force.
L1-cue_219
#For instance, if one has a stone on the end of a string, and swings it in a circle
L1-cue_220
over one’s head, then one finds that one has to pull; the reason is,
L1-cue_221
that the speed is not changing as it goes around the circle, but it’s changing its direction
L1-cue_222
so there must be perpetually an in-pulling force, and this is proportional to the mass.
L1-cue_223
So that if we were to take two different objects—
L1-cue_224
first swing one, and then swing another one at the same speed around the head,
L1-cue_225
and measure the force in the second one—that second one, the new force,
L1-cue_226
is bigger than the other force in the proportion that the masses are different.
L1-cue_227
This is a way of measuring the masses, by how hard it is to change the direction.
L1-cue_228
#Now, then, Newton saw from this that—
L1-cue_229
for instance, to take a simple example—if a planet is going in a circle around the sun,
L1-cue_230
no force is needed to make it go sideways, tangentially: if there were no force at all
L1-cue_231
on it, it would just keep coasting this way.
L1-cue_232
But actually, the planet doesn’t keep coasting this way, but finds itself later not out here,
L1-cue_233
where it would go if there were no force at all, but further down toward the sun.
L1-cue_234
In other words, its velocity, its motion, has been deflected toward the sun.
L1-cue_235
So what the angels have to do is to beat their wings in toward the sun all the time;
L1-cue_236
that the motion to keep it going in a straight line has no known reason.
L1-cue_237
#The reason why things coast forever has never been found out—
L1-cue_238
the law of inertia has no known origin.
L1-cue_239
So the angels don’t exist, but the continuation of the motion does.
L1-cue_240
But in order to obtain the falling operation we do need a force.
L1-cue_241
So it became apparent that the force was toward the sun.
L1-cue_242
As a matter of fact, Newton was able to demonstrate that the statement
L1-cue_243
that equal areas are swept in equal times was a direct consequence of the simple idea that all
L1-cue_244
of the changes in velocity are directed exactly to the sun, even in the elliptical case.
L1-cue_245
Maybe I’ll have time next time to show you how that works in detail.
L1-cue_246
#So from this law, he would confirm the idea that the force is toward the sun—
L1-cue_247
and from knowing how the periods of the different planets vary with the distance away
L1-cue_248
from the sun, it’s possible to determine how that force must weaken at different distances—
L1-cue_249
and he was able to determine that the force must vary inversely as the square of the distance.
L1-cue_250
Now, so far he hasn’t said anything new, because he only said the two things which Kepler said,
L1-cue_251
in different language: one is exactly equivalent to the statement
L1-cue_252
that the force is toward the sun; the other is exactly equivalent to the statement
L1-cue_253
that the law is inversely as a square of the distance.
L1-cue_254
#But: people had seen in telescopes that Jupiter’s satellites are going around Jupiter;
L1-cue_255
it looked like a little solar system—so the satellites were attracted to Jupiter.
L1-cue_256
And the moon is attracted to the earth,
L1-cue_257
and goes around the earth—it’s attracted in the same way.
L1-cue_258
So it looks like everything’s attracted to everything else.
L1-cue_259
#The next statement was to generalize this—
L1-cue_260
to say that every object attracts every other object.
L1-cue_261
If so, the earth must be pulling on the moon, just as the sun pulls on the planets.
L1-cue_262
But it’s known that the earth pulls on things, because you’re all sitting tightly in your seats
L1-cue_263
in spite of your desires to float out of the hall at this time.
L1-cue_264
The pull for objects on the earth was well known in the phenomenon of gravitation;
L1-cue_265
it was Newton’s idea, then, that maybe the gravitation which held the moon
L1-cue_266
in its orbit was the same gravitation that pulled objects toward the earth.
L1-cue_267
#Now, it is easy to figure out how far the moon falls in one second, because if it went
L1-cue_268
in a straight line—you know the size of the orbit; you know it takes a month to go around—
L1-cue_269
and if you figure out how far it goes in one second, you can figure out how far the circle
L1-cue_270
of the moon’s orbit has fallen below the straight line that it would have been
L1-cue_271
in if it didn’t go the way it does go.
L1-cue_272
This distance is 1/20th of an inch.
L1-cue_273
#Now, the moon is 60 times as far away from the earth’s center than we are:
L1-cue_274
we’re 4,000 miles away from the center, and the moon is 240,000 miles away from the center.
L1-cue_275
So if the law of inverse square is right, an object at the earth’s surface should fall
L1-cue_276
in one second by 1/20th of an inch times 3600 (being the square of 60,
L1-cue_277
because the force has been weakened by 60 x 60 for the inverse square law,
L1-cue_278
in getting out there to the moon).
L1-cue_279
If you multiply a 20th of an inch by 3600, you get about 16 feet—
L1-cue_280
and lo, it is known already from Galileo’s measurements that things fell in one second
L1-cue_281
on the earth’s surface by 16 feet.
L1-cue_282
So this meant, you see, that he was on the right track—there was no going back now!
L1-cue_283
Because a new fact that was completely independent previously—
L1-cue_284
the period of the moon’s orbit and its distance from the earth—was connected to another fact—
L1-cue_285
how long it takes something to fall in one second.
L1-cue_286
This was a dramatic test that everything’s all right.
L1-cue_287
#Further, he had a lot of other predictions.
L1-cue_288
He was able to calculate what the shape of the orbit should be with the law
L1-cue_289
of the inverse square, and found, indeed, that it was an ellipse.
L1-cue_290
So he got three for two, as it were.
L1-cue_291
#In addition, a number of new phenomena now had obvious explanations.
L1-cue_292
One was the tides: the tides were due to the pull of the moon on the earth.
L1-cue_293
This had sometimes been thought of before, with the difficulty that if it was the pull
L1-cue_294
of the moon on the earth—the earth being here and the water is being pulled up to the moon—
L1-cue_295
then there would only be one tide a day where that bump of water is under the moon.
L1-cue_296
But actually, you know, there are tides every 12 hours, roughly; that’s two tides a day.
L1-cue_297
#There was another school of thought that had a different conclusion:
L1-cue_298
their theory was that it was the earth that was pulled by the moon, away from the water!
L1-cue_299
Newton was the first one to realize what actually was going on:
L1-cue_300
that the force of the moon on the earth, and on the water, is the same at the same distance—
L1-cue_301
and that the water here is closer to the moon, and the water here is further from the moon
L1-cue_302
than the earth—than the rigid earth—so that the water is pulled more toward the moon here,
L1-cue_303
and here is less toward the moon than the earth, so there’s a combination
L1-cue_304
of those two pictures that makes a double tide.
L1-cue_305
#Actually, the earth does the same trick as the moon: it goes around a circle, really.
L1-cue_306
I mean, the force of the moon on the earth is balanced, but by what?
L1-cue_307
By the fact that—just like the moon goes in a circle to balance the earth’s force—
L1-cue_308
the earth is also going in a circle.
L1-cue_309
Actually, the center of that circle is somewhere inside the earth;
L1-cue_310
it’s also going in a circle to balance the moon.
L1-cue_311
So the two of them go around a common center here—
L1-cue_312
and, if you wish, this water is thrown off by centrifugal force more than the earth is,
L1-cue_313
and this water’s attracted more than this average of the earth.
L1-cue_314
At any rate, the tides were then explained, and the fact that there were two a day.
L1-cue_315
#A lot of other things became quite clear:
L1-cue_316
why the earth is round (because everything gets pulled in)
L1-cue_317
and why it isn’t exactly round (because it’s spinning, so the outside gets thrown
L1-cue_318
out a little bit and it balances), and why the sun and moon are round, and so on.
L1-cue_319
#Now, as science developed and measurements were made ever more accurately,
L1-cue_320
the tests of Newton’s law became much more stringent.
L1-cue_321
The first careful tests involved the moons of Jupiter: by careful observations
L1-cue_322
of the way they went around over a long period of time, one could be very careful to check
L1-cue_323
that everything was according to Hoyle... —Newton;
L1-cue_324
it turned out not to be the case.
L1-cue_325
The moons of Jupiter appeared to get sometimes eight minutes ahead of time,
L1-cue_326
and sometimes eight minutes behind schedule,
L1-cue_327
where "schedule" is the calculated values according to Newton’s laws—
L1-cue_328
it was noticed that they were ahead of schedule when they were close, when Jupiter was close
L1-cue_329
to the earth, and behind schedule when it was far away—a rather odd circumstance.
L1-cue_330
#Ole Romer [in 1676], having confidence in the law of gravitation,
L1-cue_331
came to an interesting conclusion: that it takes light some time to travel from the moons
L1-cue_332
to the earth, and that what we’re looking at when we see the moons is not how they are now,
L1-cue_333
but how they were the time ago that it took the light to get here.
L1-cue_334
Now, when Jupiter is near us, it takes less time for the light to come,
L1-cue_335
and when Jupiter is further, it takes longer time.
L1-cue_336
So he had to correct the observations for the differences in time.
L1-cue_337
And by the fact that they were this too much early or that much too late,
L1-cue_338
was able to determine the velocity of light.
L1-cue_339
#This was the first demonstration that light is not an instantaneously propagating material.
L1-cue_340
I bring this particular matter to your attention because it illustrates something:
L1-cue_341
when a law is right, it can be used to find another one.
L1-cue_342
By having confidence in this law, if something is the matter it suggests,
L1-cue_343
perhaps, some other phenomenon.
L1-cue_344
If we had not known the law of gravitation, we would have taken much longer to find the speed
L1-cue_345
of light, because we would not have known what to expect of Jupiter’s satellites.
L1-cue_346
This process has developed into an avalanche of discoveries:
L1-cue_347
each new discovery permits the tools for much more discovery, and this is the beginning
L1-cue_348
of that avalanche which has gone on, now, for 400 years in a continuous process—
L1-cue_349
and we’re still avalanching along at high speed at this time.
L1-cue_350
#Another problem came up: the planets shouldn’t really go in ellipses,
L1-cue_351
because according to Newton’s laws, they’re not attracted only by the sun, but also they pull
L1-cue_352
on each other—a little bit, only a little bit.
L1-cue_353
But a little bit is something, and will alter the motion a little bit.
L1-cue_354
So Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus were big planets that were known, and calculations were made
L1-cue_355
as to how slightly different than the perfect ellipses of Kepler the planets ought
L1-cue_356
to be going—Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus—by the pull of one on each other.
L1-cue_357
When they were finished (the calculations, I mean, and the observations),
L1-cue_358
it was noticed that Jupiter and Saturn went according to the calculations,
L1-cue_359
but that Uranus was doing something funny—
L1-cue_360
another opportunity for Newton’s laws to be found wanting.
L1-cue_361
#But, courage: two men—both who made these calculations, Adams and Le Verrier,
L1-cue_362
independently and at almost exactly the same time—
L1-cue_363
proposed that the motions of Uranus were due to an unseen-as-yet new planet.
L1-cue_364
They wrote letters to their respective observatories telling them to look:
L1-cue_365
turn your telescope, and look there, and you’ll find a planet.
L1-cue_366
How absurd!—said one of the observatories—that some guy sitting with pieces of paper
L1-cue_367
and pencils can tell us where we look to find some new planet!
L1-cue_368
The other observatory was more—well, less—
L1-cue_369
well, the administration was different—and they found Neptune.
L1-cue_370
#More recently, in the beginning of the 20th century, it became apparent that the motion
L1-cue_371
of the planet Mercury was not exactly right, and this caused a lot of trouble
L1-cue_372
and had no explanation, until a modification of Newton’s—this did show, ultimately,
L1-cue_373
that Newton’s laws were slightly off, and that they had to be modified.
L1-cue_374
I will not discuss the modification in detail; it was made by Einstein.
L1-cue_375
#Now the question is, how far does this law extend?
L1-cue_376
Does it extent outside the solar system?
L1-cue_377
And so I show, on the first slide, evidence that the law of gravitation is
L1-cue_378
on a wider scale than just the solar system.
L1-cue_379
Here is a series of three pictures of a so—called double star.
L1-cue_380
There’s a third star, fortunately, in the picture,
L1-cue_381
so you can see that they’re really turning around [each other],
L1-cue_382
and that nobody just simply turned the frames of the pictures around,
L1-cue_383
which is easy to do on astronomical pictures.
L1-cue_384
But the stars are actually going around [each other].
L1-cue_385
By watching these things and plotting the orbit,
L1-cue_386
you see the orbit that they make on the next slide.
L1-cue_387
It’s evident that they’re attracting each other, and that they’re going
L1-cue_388
around in an ellipse according to the way expected: these are a succession
L1-cue_389
of pictures going for all these different periods of time, I think—
L1-cue_390
yes, it goes around this way—and they didn’t see it well when it was too close,
L1-cue_391
and here it is in 1905—my slide is very old; It’s gone around maybe once more since.
L1-cue_392
#You’ll be happy, except when you notice, if you haven’t noticed already,
L1-cue_393
that the center is not a focus of the ellipse, but it’s quite a bit off.
L1-cue_394
So something’s the matter with the law?
L1-cue_395
No: god hasn’t presented us with this orbit face on; it’s tilted at a funny angle.
L1-cue_396
If you take an ellipse and mark its focus, and then hold the paper at an odd angle and look
L1-cue_397
at it in projection, the focus doesn’t have to be at the focus of the projected image.
L1-cue_398
So it’s because its orbit is tilted in space that it looks that way.
L1-cue_399
It looks like it’s not the right pattern, but it’s all right,
L1-cue_400
and you can figure everything out satisfactorily for that.
L1-cue_401
How about a bigger distance?
L1-cue_402
There’s forces between the stars: does it go any further than these distances, which are not more
L1-cue_403
than two or three times the solar system’s diameter?
L1-cue_404
#Here’s something, in the next slide, that’s 100,000 times
L1-cue_405
as big as a solar system in diameter.
L1-cue_406
This is a large number of stars, a tremendous number of stars:
L1-cue_407
this white spot is not a solid white spot; it’s just because of the failure of our instruments
L1-cue_408
to resolve it, but these are very, very tiny dots just like the other stars,
L1-cue_409
well separated from one another, not hitting each other, each one falling through and back
L1-cue_410
and forth through this great globular cluster.
L1-cue_411
#It’s one of the most beautiful things in the sky—as good as sea waves and sunsets.
L1-cue_412
And the distribution of this material—
L1-cue_413
it’s perfectly clear that the thing
L1-cue_414
that holds this together is the gravitational attraction of the stars for each other.
L1-cue_415
The distribution of the material—in the sense of how the stars peter out as you go
L1-cue_416
out in distance—permits one to find out, roughly, what the law is of force
L1-cue_417
between the stars—and, of course, it comes out right; it is, roughly, the inverse square.
L1-cue_418
(The accuracy of these calculations and measurements is not anywhere near
L1-cue_419
as careful as in the solar system.)
L1-cue_420
#Onward! Does gravity extend still further?
L1-cue_421
This is a little pinpoint inside of a big galaxy,
L1-cue_422
and the next slide shows a typical galaxy: it’s clear that this thing, again,
L1-cue_423
is held together somehow, and the only candidate that’s reasonable is gravitation.
L1-cue_424
But when we get to this size, we haven’t any way any longer to check the inverse square law,
L1-cue_425
but there seems to be no doubt that these great agglomerations of stars—
L1-cue_426
these galaxies, which are 50,000 to 100,000 light years across (the solar system is, well,
L1-cue_427
from the earth to the sun is only eight light minutes); this is 100,000 light years—
L1-cue_428
that gravity is extending even over these distances.
L1-cue_429
#In the next slide is evidence that it extends even further:
L1-cue_430
here is what is called a cluster of galaxies.
L1-cue_431
There’s a galaxy here and here and here; there are galaxies here.
L1-cue_432
They’re all in one lump of galaxies—analogous to the cluster of stars,
L1-cue_433
but this time what’s clustered are those big babies that I showed you in this previous slide.
L1-cue_434
Now, this is as far as about one tenth—well, 100th maybe—of the size of the universe,
L1-cue_435
and as far as we have any direct evidence that gravitational forces extend.
L1-cue_436
So the earth’s gravitation, if we take the view, has no edge (as you may read in the newspapers,
L1-cue_437
when the planet gets "outside the field of gravity"); it keeps on going, ever weaker
L1-cue_438
and weaker, inversely as the square of the distance,
L1-cue_439
dividing by four each time you’re twice as far away, until it mingles with the strong fields
L1-cue_440
and gets lost in the confusion of the strong fields of other stars—
L1-cue_441
but all together, with the stars in its neighborhood, pulls the other stars
L1-cue_442
to form the galaxy, and, all together, they pull on other galaxies to make a pattern.
L1-cue_443
or cluster, of galaxies.
L1-cue_444
#So the earth’s gravitational field never ends, but peters out very slowly in a precise
L1-cue_445
and careful law, probably to the edges of the universe.
L1-cue_446
The law of gravitation is different than many of the other [laws]—
L1-cue_447
well, it is very important in the economy, or in the machinery, of the universe;
L1-cue_448
there are many places where gravity has its practical applications
L1-cue_449
as far as the universe is concerned.
L1-cue_450
But atypically among all the other laws of physics,
L1-cue_451
gravitation has relatively few practical applications [for us].
L1-cue_452
I mean, the new knowledge of the law has a lot of applications—
L1-cue_453
it keeps people in their seats and so on—
L1-cue_454
but the knowledge of the law has few practical applications,
L1-cue_455
relatively speaking, compared to the other laws.
L1-cue_456
#This is one case in which I picked an atypical example.
L1-cue_457
(It is impossible, by the way, by picking one example of anything, to avoid picking one
L1-cue_458
which is atypical in some sense—that’s the wonder of the world.)
L1-cue_459
The only applications I could think of were, first, in some geophysical prospecting,
L1-cue_460
in predicting the tides; nowadays, more modernly, in working out the motions
L1-cue_461
of the satellites and the planet probes, and so on, that we send up—
L1-cue_462
and also, modernly, to calculate the predictions of the planet’s position,
L1-cue_463
which have great utility for astrologers
L1-cue_464
to publish their predictions and horoscopes in the magazines.
L1-cue_465
That’s the strange world we live in, that all the advances and understanding are used only
L1-cue_466
to continue the nonsense which has existed for 2,000 years.
L1-cue_467
#Now, that shows that gravitation extends to the great distances,
L1-cue_468
but Newton said that everything attracted everything else.
L1-cue_469
Do I attract you?
L1-cue_470
Excuse me, I mean, do I attract you?
L1-cue_471
I was going to say, excuse me, do I attract you physically?
L1-cue_472
I didn’t mean that.
L1-cue_473
#What I mean is, is it really true that two things attract each other directly?
L1-cue_474
Can we make a direct test, and not just wait for the planets and look at the planets
L1-cue_475
to see if they attract each other?
L1-cue_476
This experiment—the direct test—was made by Cavendish on equipment which you see indicated
L1-cue_477
on the next slide (if I got my slides right).
L1-cue_478
#Well, I made a mistake: I was talking about the importance of gravitation, and I was overwhelmed
L1-cue_479
by my clever remark about astrologers, and forgot to mention the important places
L1-cue_480
where gravitation does have some real effect in the behavior of the universe.
L1-cue_481
One of the interesting ones is the formation of new stars.
L1-cue_482
In this picture, which is a gaseous nebula inside our own galaxy (and is not a lot
L1-cue_483
of stars, but is gas), there are places
L1-cue_484
where the gas has been compressed or attracted to itself here.
L1-cue_485
It starts, perhaps, by some kind of shock waves to get collected,
L1-cue_486
but the remainder of the phenomenon is gravitation pulls the cloud
L1-cue_487
of gas closer and closer together.
L1-cue_488
So big mobs of gas and dust collect and form balls, which, as they fall still further,
L1-cue_489
the heat generated by the falling, lights them up and they become stars—
L1-cue_490
and we have in the next slide some evidence of the creation of new stars.
L1-cue_491
It is, unfortunately, harder to see than I thought it was when I looked at it before,
L1-cue_492
but this is not exactly the same as this.
L1-cue_493
This bump here is further out than here and that this also has a new dot here.
L1-cue_494
There are- I have found better examples but were unable to produce a slide.
L1-cue_495
#There is one example of a star patch—light—
L1-cue_496
that grew in a place in 200 days so that —when—there—is— in the same kind of a condition
L1-cue_497
of a gas cloud, when the gas collects too much together by gravitation, stars are born,
L1-cue_498
and this is the beginning of new stars.
L1-cue_499
The stars belch out dirt and gasses when they explode, sometimes, and the dirt
L1-cue_500
and gasses then collect back again and make new stars—it sounds like perpetual motion.
L1-cue_501
#I now turn to the subject I meant to introduce, which was the experiments
L1-cue_502
on the small scale, to see whether things really attract each other.
L1-cue_503
And I hope, now, that the next slide does indicate—this is the second try, Yeah!
L1-cue_504
—Cavendish’s experiment.
L1-cue_505
The idea was to hang, by a very, very fine quartz fiber, a rod with two balls—
L1-cue_506
and then put two large lead balls
L1-cue_507
in the positions indicated here, next to it on the side.
L1-cue_508
Then, because of the attraction of the balls, there would be a slight twist to the fiber.
L1-cue_509
It had to be done so delicately because the gravitational force
L1-cue_510
between ordinary things is very, very tiny indeed.
L1-cue_511
And there it was.
L1-cue_512
It was possible, then, to measure the force between these two balls.
L1-cue_513
Cavendish called his experiment "weighing the earth".
L1-cue_514
#We’re pedantic and careful today; we wouldn’t let our students say that:
L1-cue_515
we would have to say they’re measuring the mass of the earth.
L1-cue_516
But the reason he said that is the following: by a direct experiment he was able
L1-cue_517
to measure the force, the two masses, and the distance,
L1-cue_518
and thus determine the gravitational constant.
L1-cue_519
You say, yes, but we have the same situation on the earth: we know what the pull is,
L1-cue_520
and we know what the mass of the object pulled is, and we know how far away we are—
L1-cue_521
but we don’t know either the mass of the earth or the constant, but only the combination.
L1-cue_522
So by measuring the constant, and knowing the facts about the pull of the earth,
L1-cue_523
the mass of the earth could be determined.
L1-cue_524
#So, indirectly, this experiment was the first determination of how heavy,
L1-cue_525
or how massive, is the ball on which we stand.
L1-cue_526
Like it’s a kind of amazing achievement to find that out,
L1-cue_527
and I think that’s why Cavendish named his experiment that way,
L1-cue_528
instead of determining the constant in the gravitation equation.
L1-cue_529
#"Weighing the earth."
L1-cue_530
#He, incidentally, was weighing the sun and everything else at the same time,
L1-cue_531
because the pull of the sun is known in the same manner.
L1-cue_532
Now, one other test of the law of gravitation is very interesting, and that is the question
L1-cue_533
as to whether the pull is exactly proportional to the mass.
L1-cue_534
If the pull is exactly proportional to the mass, and the reaction to forces—
L1-cue_535
the motions induced by forces, the changes in velocity—
L1-cue_536
are inversely proportional to the mass, that means that two objects
L1-cue_537
of different mass will change their velocity in the same manner in a gravitational field.
L1-cue_538
Or: two different things, no matter what their mass,
L1-cue_539
in a vacuum will fall the same way toward the earth.
L1-cue_540
That’s Galileo’s old experiment from the leaning tower.
L1-cue_541
#I took my young son of two and a half to the Leaning Tower of Pisa,
L1-cue_542
and now every time a guest comes he says, "Leaning Towah!"
L1-cue_543
Anyhow, it means, for example, that in a satellite (I mean a man—made satellite),
L1-cue_544
an object inside will go around the earth in the same kind of an orbit as the satellite
L1-cue_545
on the outside, and thus float in the middle, apparently.
L1-cue_546
#This fact—that the force is exactly proportional to the mass
L1-cue_547
and that the reactions are inversely to proportional mass—
L1-cue_548
has this very interesting consequence.
L1-cue_549
The question is, how accurate is it?
L1-cue_550
It has been measured by an experiment by a man named Eotvos in 1909,
L1-cue_551
and very much more recently and more accurately by Dicke, and it was known that one part
L1-cue_552
in ten thousand million the mass is exactly proportional—
L1-cue_553
I mean, the forces are exactly proportional to the mass.
L1-cue_554
How it’s possible to measure with that accuracy, I wish I had the time to explain,
L1-cue_555
but I’m afraid I cannot—it’s remarkably clever.
L1-cue_556
#I’ll give a hint, however; I’ll give one hint.
L1-cue_557
Suppose that you wanted to measure whether it’s true for the pull of the sun.
L1-cue_558
You know the sun is pulling us all; it pulls the earth, too.
L1-cue_559
But suppose you wanted to know whether, if you add a piece of lead here,
L1-cue_560
and a piece of copper here (or polyethylene and lead—it was first done with sandalwood;
L1-cue_561
now it’s done with polyethylene)—whether the pull is exactly proportional to the inertia.
L1-cue_562
The earth is going around the sun, so these things are thrown out by inertia.
L1-cue_563
They’re thrown out to the extent that these two objects have inertia.
L1-cue_564
But they’re attracted to the sun to the extent that they have mass in the attraction law.
L1-cue_565
So if they’re attracted to the sun in a different proportion than they’re thrown
L1-cue_566
out by inertia, one will be pulled toward the sun and the other away.
L1-cue_567
And so, hanging on another one of those Cavendish quartz fibers,
L1-cue_568
the thing will twist toward the sun.
L1-cue_569
It doesn’t twist at this accuracy, so we know that the sun’s attraction
L1-cue_570
for these two objects is exactly proportional to the centrifugal effect, which is inertia.
L1-cue_571
So the force of attraction on an object is exactly proportional to its coefficient
L1-cue_572
of inertia—in other words, its mass.
L1-cue_573
#I should say something about the relation of gravitation to other forces—
L1-cue_574
to other parts of nature, other phenomena in nature.
L1-cue_575
I’ll have more to say of a general quality later,
L1-cue_576
but there is one thing that’s particularly interesting,
L1-cue_577
and that is that the inverse square law appears again: it appears in the electrical laws,
L1-cue_578
for instance—that electricity also exerts forces inversely as the square
L1-cue_579
of the distance, this time between charges.
L1-cue_580
#And, one thinks perhaps that inverse square of the distance has some deep significance;
L1-cue_581
maybe gravity and electricity are different aspects of the same thing.
L1-cue_582
No one has ever succeeded in making gravity and electricity different aspects of the same thing;
L1-cue_583
today, our theories of physics—the laws of physics—are a multitude of different parts
L1-cue_584
and pieces that don’t fit together very well.
L1-cue_585
#We don’t understand the one exactly in terms of the other.
L1-cue_586
We don’t have one structure from which all is deduced; we have several pieces
L1-cue_587
that don’t quite fit exactly, yet.
L1-cue_588
That’s the reason why, in these lectures, instead of having the ability
L1-cue_589
to tell you what the law of physics is, I have to talk about the things that are common
L1-cue_590
to the various laws, because we don’t know—we don’t understand the connection between them—
L1-cue_591
but what’s very strange is, that there are certain things that are the same in both.
L1-cue_592
#But now let’s look again at the law of electricity:
L1-cue_593
the law goes inversely is the square of the distance,
L1-cue_594
but the thing that is remarkable is the tremendous difference in the strength
L1-cue_595
of the electrical and gravitational laws.
L1-cue_596
People who want to make electricity and gravitation out of the same thing will find
L1-cue_597
that electricity is so much more powerful than gravity,
L1-cue_598
that it’s hard to believe they could both have the same origin.
L1-cue_599
#Now, how can I say one thing is more powerful than another?
L1-cue_600
It depends on upon how much charge you have, and how much mass you have.
L1-cue_601
You can’t talk about how strong gravity is by saying, "I take a lump of such
L1-cue_602
and such a size," because you chose the size.
L1-cue_603
If we try to get something that nature produces—
L1-cue_604
her own pure number that has nothing to do with inches or years or anything to do
L1-cue_605
with our own dimensions—we can do it this way: if we take the fundamental particles,
L1-cue_606
such as an electron—any different ones will give different numbers,
L1-cue_607
but to get an idea of the number, take electrons.
L1-cue_608
Two electrons, each a fundamental particle; it’s an object.
L1-cue_609
It’s not something I can—I don’t have to tell you what units I measure in.
L1-cue_610
It’s two particles that are fundamental particles; they repel each other inversely
L1-cue_611
as a square of the distance due to electricity, and they attract each other inversely
L1-cue_612
as a square of the distance due to gravitation.
L1-cue_613
#Question: what is the ratio of the gravitational force to the electrical force?
L1-cue_614
That is illustrated on the next slide.
L1-cue_615
The ratio of the gravitational attraction to the electrical repulsion is given by a number
L1-cue_616
with 42 digits, and goes off here: all this is written very carefully out, so that’s 42 digits.
L1-cue_617
Now, therein lies a very deep mystery: where could such a tremendous number come from?
L1-cue_618
That means if you ever had a theory from which both of these things are to come,
L1-cue_619
how could they come in such disproportion?
L1-cue_620
From what equation has a solution which has for one, two kinds of forces, an attraction
L1-cue_621
and a repulsion with that fantastic ratio?
L1-cue_622
People have looked for such a large ratio in other places.
L1-cue_623
They’re looking for a large number.
L1-cue_624
They hope, for example, that there’s another large number.
L1-cue_625
And if you want a large number why not take the diameter
L1-cue_626
of the universe to the diameter of a proton.
L1-cue_627
Amazingly enough, it also is a number with 42 digits.
L1-cue_628
#So an interesting proposal is made that this ratio depends—is the same as—
L1-cue_629
the ratio of the size of the universe to the diameter of a proton.
L1-cue_630
But the universe is expanding with time,
L1-cue_631
and that would mean the gravitational constant is changing with time.
L1-cue_632
Although that’s a possibility, there’s no evidence to indicate that it’s in fact true,
L1-cue_633
and there are several difficulties—I mean, partial indications, that it doesn’t,
L1-cue_634
that the gravitational constant has not changed in that way.
L1-cue_635
#So this tremendous number remains a mystery.
L1-cue_636
I must say, to finish about the theory of gravitation, two more things.
L1-cue_637
One is that Einstein had to modify the laws of gravitation in accordance
L1-cue_638
with his principles of relativity.
L1-cue_639
The first was—one of the principles was—that if x cannot occur instantaneously,
L1-cue_640
while Newton’s theory said that the force was instantaneous, he has to modify Newton’s laws.
L1-cue_641
They have very small effects, these modifications.
L1-cue_642
#One of them is, all masses fall.
L1-cue_643
Light has energy, and energy is equivalent to mass, so light should fall.
L1-cue_644
That should mean that light going near the sun is deflected; it is.
L1-cue_645
Also, the force of gravitation is slightly modified in his theory,
L1-cue_646
so that the law is slightly changed—very, very slightly—
L1-cue_647
and it is just the right amount to account for the slight discrepancy
L1-cue_648
that was found in the movement of Mercury.
L1-cue_649
#Finally, with connection to the laws of physics on a small scale:
L1-cue_650
we have found that the behavior of matter on a small scale obeys laws so different,
L1-cue_651
very different, than things on a large scale.
L1-cue_652
And so the question is, how does gravity look on a small scale?
L1-cue_653
#What is what is called a quantum theory of gravity?
L1-cue_654
There is no quantum theory of gravity today: people have not succeeded completely
L1-cue_655
in making a theory which is consistent with the uncertainty principles
L1-cue_656
and the quantum mechanical principles.
L1-cue_657
#I’ll discuss these principles in another lecture.
L1-cue_658
#Now, finally, you will say to me, "Yes, you told us what happens, but what is this gravity?
L1-cue_659
Where does it come from and what is it?
L1-cue_660
Do you mean to tell me that the planet looks at the sun, sees how far it is,
L1-cue_661
takes the inverse of the square of the distance,
L1-cue_662
and then decides to move in accordance with that law?"
L1-cue_663
In other words, although I’ve stated a mathematical law,
L1-cue_664
I have given you no clue as to the mechanism.
L1-cue_665
I will discuss the possibility of doing this in the next lecture,
L1-cue_666
which is the relation of mathematics to physics.
L1-cue_667
#But finally, in this lecture I would like to remark, just at the end here,
L1-cue_668
to emphasize some characteristics that gravity has in common with the other laws
L1-cue_669
that we have mentioned as we passed along.
L1-cue_670
#The first is that it’s mathematical in its expression—
L1-cue_671
the others are that way too; we’ll discuss that next time.
L1-cue_672
#Second, it’s not exact—Einstein had to modify it.
L1-cue_673
We know it isn’t quite right yet, because they have to put the quantum theory in—
L1-cue_674
that’s the same with all our other laws; they’re not exact.
L1-cue_675
#There’s always an edge of mystery; there’s always a place
L1-cue_676
that we have some fiddling around to do yet.
L1-cue_677
That, of course, is not a property—probably not a property,
L1-cue_678
it may or may not be a property—of nature, but it certainly is common with all the laws
L1-cue_679
as we know them today—it may be only a lack of knowledge.
L1-cue_680
#But the most impressive fact is that gravity is simple:
L1-cue_681
it is simple to state the principle completely, and have not left any vagueness
L1-cue_682
for anybody to change the ideas about.
L1-cue_683
It’s simple, and therefore it’s beautiful.
L1-cue_684
It’s simple in its pattern.
L1-cue_685
I don’t mean it’s simple in its action; the motions of the various planets
L1-cue_686
and the perturbations of one on another can be quite complicated to work out,
L1-cue_687
or to follow how all those stars in the globular cluster move, is quite beyond our ability.
L1-cue_688
It’s complicated in its actions, but not in the basic pattern,
L1-cue_689
or the system underneath the whole thing; that’s a simple thing.
L1-cue_690
#That’s common in all our laws; they all turn out to be simple things,
L1-cue_691
although complex in their actual actions.
L1-cue_692
Finally comes the universality of the gravitational law.
L1-cue_693
The fact that it extends over such enormous distances.
L1-cue_694
That Newton, in his mind worrying about the solar system,
L1-cue_695
was able to predict what would happen in an experiment of Cavendish,
L1-cue_696
where Cavendish’s little model of the solar system—the two balls attracting—
L1-cue_697
has to be expanded 10 million million times to become the solar system—
L1-cue_698
and then 10 million million times expanded once again,
L1-cue_699
and we find the galaxies attracting each other by exactly the same law.
L1-cue_700
#Nature uses only the longest threads to weave her patterns, so that each small piece
L1-cue_701
of her fabric reveals the organization of the entire tapestry.
L1-cue_702
#Thank you.